---
layout: post
title: Sage Sums
tags:
  - sage
---

Today I learned that [sage](https://www.sagemath.org) can automatically
simplify lots of sums for us by interfacing with [maxima](https://maxima.sourceforge.io/).
I also learned recently that the `init.sage` file exists, which let me fix some
minor gripes with my sage. Notably, I was able to add commands `aa` and `nn`
which automatically get ascii art or a numeric answer for the most recent
expression! This is going to be a short post just to highlight how these things
work, since I had to figure them out for myself.

I was reading Concrete Mathematics the other night when I came across the
section on [Gosper's Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gosper%27s_algorithm).
This promises to solve a large class of sums 
(the [hypergeometric](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypergeometric_function) ones)
algorithmicaly, which is extremely alluring. I periodically find myself trying
simplify tricky sums (either for mse questions or for some problem I'm thinking about)
and it would be nice to offload that thinking to a computer.

Unfortunately, googling around for "gosper's method sage" and similar doesn't 
actually give anything useful (at least not quickly). In hindsight, it turns
out there's actually a `gosper_sum` buit in 
(from the [docs](https://doc.sagemath.org/html/en/reference/calculus/sage/symbolic/expression.html#sage.symbolic.expression.Expression.gosper_sum)),
but for some reason I didn't find it at the time. After some searching I instead
found a [github repo](https://github.com/benyoung/AeqB-sage) that coded
up gosper's algorithm, as well as a bunch of other algorithms from a book.
This was how I found my way to Petkovsek, Wilf, and Zeilberger's 
[A=B](https://www2.math.upenn.edu/~wilf/AeqB.html), which has lots of similar
algorithms for algorithmically simplifying sums. It's an extremely interesting
read, both mathematically and historically, and I've been enjoying it so far. 

I was planning to put up a blog post with an implementation of gosper's algorithm
so that people could come here to simplify their sums. Thankfully, I eventually 
realized I didn't have to code anything up at all! Sage actually aliases over
python's default `sum` function, and will pass off symbolic sums to maxima
where they're evaluated using tons of powerful techniques (one of which is
gosper's algorithm). The reason I was having trouble finding a function for this
was because it's baked into the `sum` function already!

I'm still putting up this post, in part to share this realization with 
anyone else who didn't know about it (which probably isn't many people...),
but in part to still provide a place where people can come to simplify sums.
In case you don't have a sage installation on your own computer, you can 
modify one of the examples below and evaluate your favorite summation here!

Let's see some quick examples. The syntax `sum(f,k,a,b)` corresponds to
$\sum_a^b f$. 

<div class="auto">
<script type="text/x-sage">
n,k = var('n,k')

# I think we're legally obligated to make this our first sum.
soln = sum(binomial(n,k),k,0,n)
show(soln)

# You can also define a symbolic function, then use it in the sum
f(n,k) = k * binomial(n,k)
soln = sum(f,k,0,n)
show(soln)
</script>
</div>

This can solve fairly complex sums. See, for instance, one of the exercises
from A=B (exercise 1d and 1e from chapter 5)

<div class="auto">
<script type="text/x-sage">
n,k = var('n,k')
soln_d = sum(k^4 * 4^k / binomial(2*k,k), k, 0, n)
show(soln_d)

f(k) = factorial(3*k) / (factorial(k) * factorial(k+1) * factorial(k+2) * 27^k)
soln_e = sum(f,k,0,n)
show(soln_e)
</script>
</div>

This has already helped me "in the wild". There is an 
[mse question](https://math.stackexchange.com/q/4039066/655547)
which asked about the sum $\sum_{n=0}^\infty \frac{16n^2 + 20n + 7}{(4n+2)!}$.
A commenter asks whether OP wants a closed form, or merely a convergence result.
Instead of wasting time trying to find a nice closed form, we can simply ask sage:

<div class="auto">
<script type="text/x-sage">
n = var('n')
f(n) = (16*n^2 + 20*n + 7) / factorial(4*n + 2)
soln = sum(f,n,0,oo) # I also just learned oo = Infinity!
show(soln)
show(soln.n())
</script>
</div>

Sage happily computed a closed form for this sum... It just happens to use
a bunch of hypergeometric functions! This pretty quickly answers the 
"does OP want a closed form" question, assuming OP's professor isn't a sadist.

Rather magically, though, this numerically agrees with $e + \sin(1)$ up 
to all available digits, according to an 
[inverse symbolic calculator](http://wayback.cecm.sfu.ca/cgi-bin/isc/lookup?number=3.55975281326694&lookup_type=simple).
Sage says this is a fluke (that is, they aren't actually equal), but it's an 
extremely bizarre coincidence. Oh well. Life is full of mysteries.

---

As an aside, in the above example we computed something exactly, but then 
used `.n()` in order to get a numerical value 
(which is often better for getting a sense of things). Since sage will let you
write `_` to get the output of the last command, `_.n()` is probably my most
typed command. Either that or `ascii_art(_)`, which draws an ascii version of 
whatever your most recent output was. Since I use sage in a terminal, rather
than a jupyter notebook, this saves me endless parsing related headaches 
when it comes to actually reading sage's output.

If you also find yourself using these commands all the time, I can't recommend
the following aliases enough. These are part of my `init.sage`, and have changed
my life. If you want to see my entire sage configuration, you can find it 
(with the rest of my dotfiles) 
[here](https://github.com/HallaSurvivor/dotfiles/blob/master/init.sage).

<div class="no_out">
<script type="text/x-sage">
# get the ipython instance so we can
# do black magic with our repl
_ipy = get_ipython()

# add a macro so typing nn will
# automatically convert the most
# recent output to a numeric.
_ipy.define_macro('nn', '_.n()')

# add a macro so typing aa will
# automatically run ascii_art 
# on the most recent output. 
_ipy.define_macro('aa', 'ascii_art(_)')
</script>
</div>

---

Before I end this post, there are a few more parting observations 
that I want to squeeze in.

First, sage can solve recurrences for you as well, 
by using either maxima's `solve_rec` or 
[sympy](https://www.sympy.org/en/index.html)'s `rsolve`. I 
have a wrapper in my `init.sage` that makes using the latter
slightly more convenient. 

Second, if you're faced with a particularly stubborn sum that sage won't
simplify for you, you should try using maxima directly. You can actually
do this from inside sage by using `maxima.console()` and then loading the
`simplify_sum` package. You can see a worked out example 
[here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/28663533/3911897), and you can see all the
high-power tools that `simplify_sum` buys you 
[here](https://github.com/andrejv/maxima/blob/master/share/solve_rec/simplify_sum.mac).
