---
layout: post
title: $L^p$ Spaces
tags:
  - analysis-qual-prep
---

On to day $2$ of qual prep boogaloo. Yesterday was all about measures
and integrable functions. Today, then, let's talk about spaces of integrable
functions. It's time for $L^p$ spaces!

Thankfully, this should be a comparatively short post, since $L^p$ spaces
are already pretty concrete, and (at least in my mind) don't need a ton of 
motivation. We want to integrate things, and $L^p$ spaces collect the functions
which we _can_ integrate. The most important cases are $L^1$, $L^2$, and $L^\infty$,
but [there are reasons][1] to care about other choices of $p$ as well. 

To start, let's remind ourselves what $L^p$ spaces even _are_. We fix a set
$X$ with a measure $\mu$. Then

$$
L^p(X, \mu) \triangleq
\bigg \{
  f : X \to \mathbb{C} \ \bigg | \ \int |f|^p \lt \infty
\bigg \}
$$

Of course, as usual, we will consider two functions the same if they agree
almost everywhere. We will also often write $L^p(X)$, $L^p(\mu)$, or even
$L^p$ if the measure or space is clear from context.

It turns out $L^p(\mu)$ comes equipped with a _ton_ of structure!
They admit a norm[^1], where 
$\lVert f \rVert_p \triangleq \left ( \int \lvert f \rvert^p \right )^{1/p}$,
and this norm makes $L^p(\mu)$ into a [banach space][2], so we can talk about
convergence without worry[^2]. 

Let's see some important examples of $L^p$ spaces before we move on:

1. If $m$ is the lebesgue measure on $\mathbb{R}^n$, then $L^p(\mathbb{R}^n, m)$ is 
one of the most common examples used in practice. This forms the basis
for a lot of intuition about $L^p$ spaces.

2. Sometimes $\mathbb{R}^n$ is too big. We might think of working
with $L^p([a,b])$. Common choices are $[0,1]$ and $[0,2\pi]$.

3. Another important example is the circle $S^1$. The spaces 
$L^p(S^1)$ are the archetypal first example for fourier theory[^4].

4. An example in a different vein is $L^p(\mathbb{N})$ with the counting measure.
This is often called $\ell^p$. Here our functions can be thought of as 
sequences of complex numbers, which makes this a particularly appealing 
setting for small examples. We'll find $\ell^2$ extremely useful when we
talk about [hilbert spaces][3].

5. The counterpoint to example (3) is $L^p(\mathbb{Z})$, again with the
counting measure. These are bi-infinite sequences of complex numbers,
often written $\ell^p(\mathbb{Z})$, and these will be related to functions
on the circle by means of the fourier transform.

---

One of the most important tools we have for proving properties about $L^p$ 
functions is the wide variety of dense subsets. If we want to prove something
for all $L^p$ functions, we can start out by proving that thing for some 
subclass where we have more available tools, then argue by continuity that 
the result is actually true for all $L^p$ functions.

These next results are true in $L^p(\mathbb{R}^n)$ and $L^p([0,1])$,
where $p \neq \infty$. More generally, they are true in $L^p(X,\mu)$
for radon measures on locally compact hausdorff spaces. See Rudin's
_Real and Complex Analysis_ for more details.

1. Simple Functions (with finite-measure support). 
That is, functions of the form $$\sum_{k=1}^n c_k \chi_{E_k}$$. 
These are dense almost by definition[^3] and form the base for proving other,
more exiting density results. After all, to show a class of functions is dense
in $L^p$, it suffices to show it can approximate the simple functions.
If we allow infinite measure support, then these functions are dense in
$L^\infty$ as well.

2. Continuous Functions (with compact support). 
Obviously these are great. We don't always need the
extra power of compact support, but it's good to know it's there!

These families of dense functions require a notion of differentiation. 
They're definitely true in $\mathbb{R}^n$ and $[0,1]$, and I suspect they're
true over any manifold. I don't have a reference on hand, though.

3. Smooth Functions (with compact support).
We love differentiation in this household. 

4. [Schwarz Functions][3].
As long as we're discussing things that only work in $\mathbb{R}^n$, 
these are functions which are not only smooth, but which vanish more quickly
than any polynomial, and all their derivatives vanish that quickly too.
We'll talk more about these in the post about fourier theory.

5. Polynomials.
On $[0,1]$, we can approximate continuous functions by polynomials
(this is the [stone-weierstrass theorem][4]).

6. Polynomials in $e^{ix}$. 
These are dense in $L^p(S^1)$, and will show up again when we talk about
fourier theory.


There's actually a kind of master theorem for density results in $L^p$ 
spaces ($p \neq \infty$), which takes some basic properties of a class of 
functions and tells you it's dense. There are also generalizations of the
theorems above to much more broad classes of measure spaces. For each of these
results, see [this][5] pdf from Bruce Driver's UCSD lecture notes.

---

Perhaps the most important inequality associated with $L^p$ spaces is 
[Hölder's inequality][6], which generalizes the [Cauchy-Schwarz][7] inequality.

<div class=boxed markdown=1>
If $\frac{1}{p} + \frac{1}{q} = 1$, then

$$\lVert fg \rVert_1 \leq \lVert f \rVert_p \lVert g \rVert_q.$$

This includes the formal case where $\frac{1}{1} + \frac{1}{\infty} = 1$:

$$\lVert fg \rVert_1 \leq \lVert f \rVert_1 \lVert g \rVert_\infty.$$

This condition on $p$ and $q$ shows up frequently, and we call $q$ the
<span class=defn>conjugate</span> of $p$ for convenience.
</div>

Here we might think of $g$ as defining a functional $\phi_g$, where
$\phi_g f \triangleq \int f g$. Then Hölder's inequality says that
(with the operator norm) $\lVert \phi_g \rVert \leq \lVert g \rVert_q$.

From this, one might ask if we actually have equality above. If you're feeling
particularly optimistic, you might even wonder if we can characterize which
functionals in $(L^p)^*$ arise as $\phi_g$ for some $g \in L^q$.

Now for the magic part:

<div class=boxed markdown=1>
For $p \neq 1, \infty$ the dual space
$$(L^p)^* \triangleq \{ T : L^p \to \mathbb{C} \mid T \text{ is continuous and linear} \}$$
has an explicit characterization:

$$(L^p)^* \cong L^q$$

where, as usual, $q$ is the conjugate of $p$.

When $\mu$ is $\sigma$-finite[^5], we moreover have $(L^1)^* \cong L^\infty$.
Unfortunately, though, $(L^\infty)^*$ is almost never $L^1$ 
(at least, assuming the axiom of choice[^6]).
</div>

The proof of this fact actually goes through complex valued measures!
If $\phi$ is a functional on $L^p$, then it's not hard to see that 
$\nu E \triangleq \phi \chi_E$ is a (complex valued) measure! Moreover,
if $E$ is $\mu$-null, then $\chi_E = 0$ a.e., and so 
$\nu E = \phi \chi_E = 0$. This means $\nu \ll \mu$, and so by radon-nikodym
$\nu = \mu_g$ for some function $g$. Now some simple bookkeeping is all we
need to do to show that $g \in L^q$ and $\phi f = \int fg$.

TODO: mention reflexivity

---

Frequently one has a function $f \in L^p$, which we would _like_ to know 
is in $L^q$. More generally, we would like to relate functions in $L^p$
to functions in $L^q$ with $q$ on either side of $p$.

TODO: for instance, when doing fourier analysis, we're often interested in
$L^1$ functions, even though the techniques of the fourier transform are 
best understood in $L^2$.

TODO: inclusions in the finite measure case. Are there other useful inclusions?

TODO: interpolation functions ($L^p = L^q + L^r = L^{q'} \cap L^{r'}$)

TODO: mention in passing that $L^2$ is meagre in $L^1$, we'll say more
when we talk about Baire category


---

TODO: Say a word about how $L^1$ is the completion of the continuous functions
in the $p$-norm, but $L^\infty$ is _not_ the completion of $C_c$ in the 
$\infty$-norm! That's $C_0$, and this is part of why $L^\infty$ is pathological.

TODO: Show how $$\lim_{p \to \infty} \lVert \cdot \rVert_p = \lVert \cdot \rVert_\infty$$

TODO: $L^p$ for $p$ small allows singularities, but requires rapid decay,
while $L^p$ for $p$ large allows slower decay, but penalizes singularities

---

[^1]:
    This is one pressing reason to quotient by almost-everywhere equivalence.
    Do you see why $\lVert f \rVert_p$ would _not_ be a norm if we didn't 
    identify equivalent functions? 

[^2]:
    Don't worry -- we'll be talking a _lot_ about banach spaces in an upcoming 
    post. But $L^p$ spaces are very fundamental examples, so it's worth talking
    about them first.

[^3]:
    Recall we _define_ the lebesgue integral of $f$ 
    to be the limit of the integrals of simple functions below $f$.

[^4]:
    We'll talk about Fourier theory in an upcoming post too!

[^5]:
    Actually, we can get by with slightly less.

    We always have a natural map $L^\infty \to (L^1)^*$ which sends
    $g$ to the functional $f \mapsto \int fg$.

    It turns out this map is an isometric embedding if and only if $\mu$
    is semifinite. That is, when any infinite measure set contains a set of
    finite measure. This is obviously a _super_ mild assumption.

    Moreover, this map is _surjective_ (and thus an isometry) when $\mu$
    is "localizable". See [here][8], for instance.

[^6]:
    $L^1$ embeds isometrically inside $(L^\infty)^*$, but in $\mathsf{ZFC}$
    this is _not_ surjective. 
    
    To build a functional on $L^\infty$ that doesn't come from some $L^1$
    function, we look at the subspace of continuous functions, and 
    consider evaluation at a point. We can extend this functional to the 
    whole space via the [Hahn-Banach Theorem][9], and it's pretty quick to
    see that this can't come from an $L^1$ function 
    (since a dirac delta function doesn't _really_ exist).

    We'll talk more about the Hahn-Banach theorem in a future post, but
    importantly it relies on the axiom of choice! There are actually models
    of set theory where Hahn-Banach fails, and which think that 
    $L^1$ really _is_ $(L^\infty)^*$! See Martin Väth's 
    [_The Dual Space of $L^\infty$ is $L^1$_][10], as well as the excellent
    discussion [here][11]



[1]: https://mathoverflow.net/questions/28147/why-do-we-care-about-lp-spaces-besides-p-1-p-2-and-p-infty
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banach_space
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schwartz_space
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stone%E2%80%93Weierstrass_theorem
[5]: http://www.math.ucsd.edu/~bdriver/240A-C-03-04/Lecture_Notes/Older-Versions/chap22.pdf
[6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H%C3%B6lder%27s_inequality
[7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cauchy%E2%80%93Schwarz_inequality
[8]: https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/405357/when-exactly-is-the-dual-of-l1-isomorphic-to-l-infty-via-the-natural-map
[9]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hahn%E2%80%93Banach_theorem
[10]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019357798800396?via%3Dihub
[11]: https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/103476/ell1-vs-continuous-dual-of-ell-infty-in-zfad
