---
published: true
---

A complex-valued function of a complex variable having two complex periods is called doubly periodic. If the ratio of the two periods is rational then both the periods turn out to be multiple of a single complex period, so the function is essentially has a single period; if the ratio is irrational then the function has arbitrarily small periods (not easy to see though) so that the function having vanishing derivative wherever it is analytic turns out to be constant, an uninteresting object of study. So when doubly periodic functions are mentioned it is implicitly assumed that the ratio of the periods is not real. Any two such periods, called fundamental periods, together with their integer linear combinations constitute  the lattice of all the periods of the function, and the parallelogram spanned by these fundamental periods is called the fundamental parallelogram. In practice, the fundamental parallelogram consists of the inside of the parallelogram spanned by the fundamental periods together with the boundary line segments  representing these periods and intersecting at the origin, while their opposite sides are ignored.

A doubly periodic function that is entire should be a constant function by Liouville's theorem, so if we are seeking for nonconstant doubly periodic functions they must have singularities. Simplest among them are those which have finitely many poles inside the fundamental parallelogram. Such functions are called elliptic functions, namely those which are meromorphic and doubly periodic function on the complex plane. The set of poles being discrete with no accumulation in the finite complex plane, one can move the period parallelogram slightly upwards/downwards and forwards/backwards to position it in such a way that the boundary of the displaced parallelogram is pole-free.  Applying Cauchy's residue theorem and using the fact that function is periodic, the contour integral of the function along the boundary is zero, the integral along the side being cancelled out by the integral on the side opposite to it (being traversed in the opposite direction); therefore the sum of residues of the poles inside the parallelogram is zero. Thus, the most elementary among such functions should either have two simple poles with residues of equal and opposite sign or a double pole with zero residue.  Considering functions of the latter type lead to the construction of Weierstrass's famous rho function and eventually to the notion of modular forms which are the central objects of this article, while considering of the former type lead to Jacobi's theory of theta functions not discussed in this article.
